# Key Encapsulation Mechanism (KEM)

> 💡 This is a hacspec representation of the [HPKE RFC].
> The text is mostly verbatim from the RFC with changes where required.
> It demonstrates the possibilities of hacspec for specifications.

- [`GenerateKeyPair`]`()`: Randomized algorithm to generate a key pair `(skX, pkX)`.
- [`DeriveKeyPair`]`(ikm)`: Deterministic algorithm to derive a key pair
  `(skX, pkX)` from the byte string `ikm`, where `ikm` SHOULD have at
  least `Nsk` bytes of entropy.
- [`SerializePublicKey`]`(pkX)`: Produce a byte string of length `Npk` encoding the
  public key `pkX`.
- [`DeserializePublicKey`]`(pkXm)`: Parse a byte string of length `Npk` to recover a
  public key. This function can raise a `DeserializeError` error upon `pkXm`
  deserialization failure.
- [`Encap`]`(pkR)`: Randomized algorithm to generate an ephemeral,
  fixed-length symmetric key (the KEM shared secret) and
  a fixed-length encapsulation of that key that can be decapsulated
  by the holder of the private key corresponding to `pkR`. This function
  can raise an `EncapError` on encapsulation failure.
- [`Decap`]`(enc, skR)`: Deterministic algorithm using the private key `skR`
  to recover the ephemeral symmetric key (the KEM shared secret) from
  its encapsulated representation `enc`. This function can raise a
  `DecapError` on decapsulation failure.
- [`AuthEncap`]`(pkR, skS)` (optional): Same as `Encap()`, and the outputs
  encode an assurance that the KEM shared secret was generated by the
  holder of the private key `skS`.
- [`AuthDecap`]`(enc, skR, pkS)` (optional): Same as `Decap()`, and the recipient
  is assured that the KEM shared secret was generated by the holder of
  the private key `skS`.
- [`Nsecret`]: The length in bytes of a KEM shared secret produced by this KEM.
- [`Nenc`]: The length in bytes of an encapsulated key produced by this KEM.
- [`Npk`]: The length in bytes of an encoded public key for this KEM.
- [`Nsk`]: The length in bytes of an encoded private key for this KEM.

Beyond the above, a KEM MAY also expose the following functions, whose behavior
is detailed below:

- `SerializePrivateKey(skX)`: Produce a byte string of length `Nsk` encoding the private
  key `skX`.
- `DeserializePrivateKey(skXm)`: Parse a byte string of length `Nsk` to recover a
  private key. This function can raise a `DeserializeError` error upon `skXm`
  deserialization failure.

### SerializePublicKey and DeserializePublicKey

For P-256, P-384 and P-521, the [`SerializePublicKey()`] function of the
KEM performs the uncompressed Elliptic-Curve-Point-to-Octet-String
conversion according to [SECG]. [`DeserializePublicKey()`] performs the
uncompressed Octet-String-to-Elliptic-Curve-Point conversion.

For X25519 and X448, the [`SerializePublicKey()`] and [`DeserializePublicKey()`]
functions are the identity function, since these curves already use
fixed-length byte strings for public keys.

Some deserialized public keys MUST be validated before they can be used. See
[Validation](#validation-of-inputs-and-outputs) for specifics.

## SerializePrivateKey and DeserializePrivateKey

As per [SECG], P-256, P-384, and P-521 private keys are field elements in the
scalar field of the curve being used. For this section, and for
[`DeriveKeyPair()`], it is assumed that implementers of ECDH over these curves
use an integer representation of private keys that is compatible with the
`OS2IP()` function.

For P-256, P-384 and P-521, the `SerializePrivateKey()` function of the KEM
performs the Field-Element-to-Octet-String conversion according to [SECG]. If
the private key is an integer outside the range `[0, order-1]`, where `order`
is the order of the curve being used, the private key MUST be reduced to its
representative in `[0, order-1]` before being serialized.
`DeserializePrivateKey()` performs the Octet-String-to-Field-Element conversion
according to [SECG].

For X25519 and X448, private keys are identical to their byte string
representation, so little processing has to be done. The
`SerializePrivateKey()` function MUST clamp its output and
`DeserializePrivateKey()` MUST clamp its input, where _clamping_ refers to the
bitwise operations performed on `k` in the `decodeScalar25519()` and
`decodeScalar448()` functions defined in section 5 of [RFC7748].

To catch invalid keys early on, implementers of DHKEMs SHOULD check that
deserialized private keys are not equivalent to 0 (mod `order`), where `order`
is the order of the DH group. Note that this property is trivially true for X25519
and X448 groups, since clamped values can never be 0 (mod `order`).

### DeriveKeyPair

See [`DeriveKeyPair()`] for details.

## DH-Based KEM

Suppose we are given a KDF, and a Diffie-Hellman group providing the
following operations:

- [`DH(skX, pkY)`](<`DH()`>): Perform a non-interactive Diffie-Hellman exchange using
  the private key `skX` and public key `pkY` to produce a Diffie-Hellman shared
  secret of length `Ndh`. This function can raise a [`ValidationError`](`HpkeError::ValidationError`) as described
  in [validation](#validation-of-inputs-and-outputs).
- [`Ndh`]: The length in bytes of a Diffie-Hellman shared secret produced
  by [`DH()`].
- [`Nsk`]: The length in bytes of a Diffie-Hellman private key.

Then we can construct a KEM that implements the KEM interface
called `DHKEM(Group, KDF)` in the following way, where `Group` denotes the
Diffie-Hellman group and `KDF` the KDF. The function parameters `pkR` and `pkS`
are deserialized public keys, and `enc` is a serialized public key. Since
encapsulated keys are Diffie-Hellman public keys in this KEM algorithm,
we use [`SerializePublicKey()`] and [`DeserializePublicKey()`] to encode and decode
them, respectively. [`Npk`] equals [`Nenc`]. [`GenerateKeyPair()`] produces a key pair
for the Diffie-Hellman group in use.

The `suite_id` value used within [`LabeledExtract`] and
[`LabeledExpand`] is defined as follows, where `kem_id` is defined
in [`KEM`]:

```text
suite_id = concat("KEM", I2OSP(kem_id, 2))
```

The KDF used in DHKEM can be equal to or different from the KDF used
in the remainder of HPKE, depending on the chosen variant.
Implementations MUST make sure to use the constants (`Nh`) and function
calls ([`LabeledExtract`], [`LabeledExpand`]) of the appropriate KDF when
implementing DHKEM. See [`kdf`](`mod@crate::hpke::kdf`) for a comment on the choice of
a KDF for the remainder of HPKE, and the
rationale of the labels.

For the variants of DHKEM defined in this document, the size [`Nsecret`] of the
KEM shared secret is equal to the output length of the hash function
underlying the KDF. For P-256, P-384 and P-521, the size [`Ndh`] of the
Diffie-Hellman shared secret is equal to 32, 48, and 66, respectively,
corresponding to the x-coordinate of the resulting elliptic curve point [IEEE1363].
For X25519 and X448, the size [`Ndh`] of is equal to 32 and 56, respectively
(see [RFC7748], Section 5).

It is important to note that the [`AuthEncap()`] and [`AuthDecap()`] functions of the
DHKEM variants defined in this document are vulnerable to key-compromise
impersonation (KCI). This means the assurance that the KEM shared secret
was generated by the holder of the private key `skS` does not hold if
the recipient private key `skR` is compromised.

Senders and recipients MUST validate KEM inputs and outputs as described
in [`KEM`].

### Validation of Inputs and Outputs

The following public keys are subject to validation if the group
requires public key validation: the sender MUST validate the recipient's
public key `pkR`; the recipient MUST validate the ephemeral public key
`pkE`; in authenticated modes, the recipient MUST validate the sender's
static public key `pkS`. Validation failure yields a `ValidationError`.

For P-256, P-384 and P-521, senders and recipients MUST perform partial
public-key validation on all public key inputs, as defined in section 5.6.2.3.4
of [NIST SP 800-56A]. This includes checking that the coordinates are in the
correct range, that the point is on the curve, and that the point is not the
point at infinity. Additionally, senders and recipients MUST ensure the
Diffie-Hellman shared secret is not the point at infinity.

For X25519 and X448, public keys and Diffie-Hellman outputs MUST be validated
as described in [RFC7748]. In particular, recipients MUST check whether
the Diffie-Hellman shared secret is the all-zero value and abort if so.

### Future KEMs

[KEM Security](#security-requirements-on-a-kem-used-within-hpke) lists security requirements on a KEM used within HPKE.

The [`AuthEncap()`] and [`AuthDecap()`] functions are OPTIONAL. If a KEM algorithm
does not provide them, only the Base and PSK modes of HPKE are supported.
Future specifications which define new KEMs MUST indicate whether or not
Auth and AuthPSK modes are supported.

A KEM algorithm may support different encoding algorithms, with different output
lengths, for KEM public keys. Such KEM algorithms MUST specify only one encoding
algorithm whose output length is [`Npk`].

[ieee1363]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IEEE_P1363
[rfc7748]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7748
[secg]: https://secg.org/sec1-v2.pdf
[nist sp 800-56A]: https://doi.org/10.6028/nist.sp.800-56ar3
[hpke rfc]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-irtf-cfrg-hpke/
[publication queue]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/current_queue.php
